>>LISA GARR: Hello and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Today we're going to be asking
the deeper questions: how
our understanding of mind, time,
space, and matter have changed.
And we're also
going to be looking
at the art of cheating time,
otherwise known as time travel.
And we're going to
look at all of this
in the perspective
of quantum physics,
and we're going to
find out how this
applies to our own
personal lives.
Joining me is quantum
physicist Fred Allan
Wolf, also known
as a Dr. Quantum
as he's affectionately
called, and he
is a way of taking
these abstract topics
and really bringing them to
a simple way of understanding
them.
His latest book is called
"Time Loops and Space Twists,"
and this is what we're going
to be talking about today.
Welcome to the show.
>>FRED ALLAN WOLF: Thank
you very much, very much.
Nice to be here Lisa.
>>LISA: I'm glad you're
here because we are--
I'm in for a whole education
today as well as our listeners.
How long have you been
practicing quantum physics?
How do you practice it?
>>WOLF: Well, as
I said, you need
to practice it because basically
practicing quantum physics
is just practicing
one basic thing
we all know, do unto
others as you want them
to do onto you because
if you don't, they well.
>>LISA: So that's basically
the quantum entanglement where
we're constantly--
>>WOLF: That's it.
We're all basically entangled
from the Big Bang onwards,
and if what we're
talking about now
and the new ideas
of physics are true,
we're entangled
from the future too.
So it's just the
future and the present
and the past are constantly
making us come into being.
So yes, we have free will.
No, we don't have free will.
Yes we do.
No we don't.
On a much larger
scale, it's much more
of a magical light show than
we ever, ever thought possible.
>>LISA: And what I really
appreciate about you
is you take these
complex subjects
and you bring them to reality.
You make them easy for us
to understand who are not
quantum physicist,
but yet we live
in the quantum world
every waking moment,
every sleeping moment.
So we are now going to
be able to understand
what this time, space, and
matter is around us right now.
So right now we're
living with matter
all around us, all around us.
What does that mean?
>>WOLF: Well, I'll
tell you the secret
is that if there wasn't
all this stuff, matter,
all the way around us, everybody
would be able to do everything
they wanted instantly, and
it would be effortless,
and everything would
be, oh, wonderful.
For four days that's great,
but after an eternity of that,
it's boring, boring.
>>LISA: Really?
That sounds pretty good to me.
>>WOLF: Try it.
If you get everything
you want, everything you
want all the time--
>>LISA: Then you'd
be a celebrity.
>>WOLF: --then you actually
don't want anything,
because you've got
everything, so what
are you going to do now?
Well, you want something
that's going to challenge you,
something that's
going to inspire you,
something that you're going to
have to work towards getting.
And that's where you
might say God had this--
>>LISA: Plan.
>>WOLF: Great thought.
Let's make a material
world in which
people don't get exactly
what they want instantly.
In fact, I'm going to get
into this world in such a way
that even I don't get
what I want instantly
because I'm going to
forget who I really am.
And when I did that, suddenly
I appeared as Lisa Garr.
There she is, god in person.
Fred Alan Wolf, there
he is, god in person.
And every other of the 7
billion or how many people
we have on the planet now,
they're all god in disguise,
none of them realizing that the
reason they're in a material
body is because they want to
be able to achieve something
in their life other
than just living.
>>LISA: So is it
more than the mind
and the ego that
wants to achieve?
>>WOLF: It's kind
of a cosmic game.
The game is I want
to achieve, but I
don't want to make
it so easy to achieve
that I have no sense
of accomplishment.
>>LISA: So that's really
a law in the universe.
>>WOLF: It is a law
in the universe.
The basic law of the universe
is to forget yourself, remember
yourself.
To remember yourself,
forget yourself.
I mean, in all the spiritual
teachings, they all say this,
and everybody says, what
the heck you talking about?
And from a quantum
physics point of view,
it makes perfectly good
sense as we will find out,
as we explore in the show
we're doing together.
>>LISA: OK.
Good.
So let's get into this.
So what does it mean?
Is it really all an illusion?
>>WOLF: Well, that
is a good question.
Is it really all an illusion,
or is it not all an illusion?
Well, in order to
get into that, we
need to talk about not
only is it an illusion,
but who's fooling who with what?
What is the illusion consisting
of, and who's the illusion for?
You know, when a magician does
a trick, there's an audience
and there's a performer.
And the performer is doing
the trick for the audience.
>>LISA: It's observing
the performer.
>>WOLF: Now, think of what
you might do with that if you
are the performer and the
audience at the same time.
Then you're doing it
in front of a mirror,
and it turns out that mirrors
and mirror symmetries are
the most important thing we have
discovered in quantum physics
to date.
It helps us to
understand, actually,
how this universe got
created in the first place,
and even how time and
matter get created.
It's all really
done with mirrors,
and that's something we
are going to explore.
So is it all an illusion?
Yes, it is.
It basically is.
And what we're going
to find out is,
what's making the
illusion come in?
Who is the illusion for?
It's God.
It's the mind of God.
It's your mind.
>>LISA: Explain the mind of God.
We're not talking about
the white man in the sky.
Right?
We're talking about
from a universal God.
>>WOLF: Yes.
From a certain perspective, from
a quantum physical, scientific
kind of perspective,
which by the way,
no scientist would ever say.
Because scientists live
under the Shibboleth thou
shalt not ever mention
spiritual or God or religion
or spirituality
because it's forbidden.
And the reason
we're doing this is
because 500 years ago,
you were chopping off
the heads of scientists,
you religious guys,
and we don't want you to
do that anymore to us.
>>LISA: I see.
Interesting.
>>WOLF: They remember.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: You don't
forget things like that.
So science has been
anti-religious ever since.
So anyway, the mind
of God is a field
which fills the whole universe.
And it's your mind, and when
you remember who you really are,
you identify with this field,
which is the mind of God.
And from that point
of view, you project
into various activities,
universes, worlds,
however you want
to play the game.
And as long as you remember
who and what you are,
you could always get out as
well as get back in again.
For those of us living here
on Earth, our 80 to 100
or 90 to 1,000,
whatever years we're
going to be alive on
this planet-- for us,
for ordinary folk,
we kind of forget it
because we get so much
into the day-to-day stuff
that we forget that.
So we give ourselves a
gentle reminder, we die.
>>LISA: Gentle.
>>WOLF: Very gentle.
We just get out of
here after a while,
because you get too attached
it, and sometimes life
can be hard because,
after all, you
are trying to move around mass--
>>LISA: But as I've heard,
that when you do crossover,
from many of the guests who
have sat in this chair here,
that idea of the quantum
field then expands,
and that's the
place to live from.
>>WOLF: You know,
expands, contracts,
I mean, whatever it does,
you're already there.
The point is that when
you're in body form,
you don't know
you're there or you
tend to forget you're there
because the ego, which
is the body-mind, which is
that mind which is telling you,
don't stick your finger
in the white socket.
Ah, the light's red.
Don't cross.
That mind, that
body-mind is more--
it's concerned with the
survival of the mind
within the framework.
The confusion that
comes from that
is that, ah, that's
all that it is.
My mind is some kind of
emergence from the body,
and the body-- you're born,
terrible; you live, terrible;
you die, black.
>>LISA: That would be horrible.
>>WOLF: That's basically
the way people think,
and that is-- some people think.
And that is not only
unpleasant, but it's basically
an assumption.
It's not a basic truth.
It's not based upon anything
other than our observations
that we are born,
we live, and we die.
And that doesn't mean that
we don't continue in some way
afterwards.
We have no proof of that.
We have no way of
identifying that.
But what I'm trying
to do is explain
that there has to be mind
present in the universe,
and that means that the
present state of that mind
in various bodies is capable
of transforming or changing.
>>LISA: So what
we're doing today
is we're going to go on this
journey of quantum physics
and how it relates to our
matter in time and space
in the universe.
So let's talk about
that a little bit.
>>WOLF: Well, so-- my favorite
characters as I grew up,
and I understand some of
you at home watching this
may not remember
these characters,
are the Marx brothers.
>>LISA: I remember
the Marx brothers.
>>WOLF: And they
were very comical
because they were always trying
to figure out what to do.
They always had lots of
ideas, and they were always
come up with comical
solutions to what goes on.
Harpo was my favorite character
because he didn't speak,
but he was, I
thought, the funniest
although Groucho
was certainly funny.
Anyway, these are
the characters,
and what they were
coming up with,
you might think were
bubbles of possibilities.
And I want to play with
that idea of bubbles
of possibilities a little bit
in explaining this when we talk
about the time and
mind and quantum
bubbles of possibilities,
and what do I mean by that?
I mean that basically
quantum physics is telling us
that the universe doesn't
come into being as one thing.
It comes into being as
many possible universes
simultaneously.
And that's the latest dope,
and this latest dope, I mean,
it sounds dopey.
How can there be more
than one uni-- universe
is a singular word.
How can it be universes?
Call them multiverses
if you want to.
>>LISA: Or parallel universes.
>>WOLF: Parallel
universes, a book
that I wrote about
that subject matter.
Anyway, so when we look at
all these possibilities,
we might think about a kid
who's thinking, what am I to do?
So he's pondering, and
thinking, and worrying.
And he gets an idea.
An idea props,
comes into his head
and then suddenly something
begins to emerge in his mind.
And when that thing
emerges, something pops.
And when that thing pops,
we suddenly have, oh--
>>LISA: An idea.
>>WOLF: An idea, a star, or
twinkle, twinkle little bat,
how I wonder what you're at.
>>LISA: Did you write that?
>>WOLF: I'm sure somebody very
clever in the biz wrote that.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: And now we
have an idea appearing.
So now I try to map out with
our favorite characters-- there
actually originally four Marx
brothers-- how this might look.
And how it might look
is that we started out
with what I call a
precedent blur, which
means many possibilities.
We don't know which one.
And we're all
looking and thinking
and trying to find out
which one is the right one.
And then suddenly we
have a focal point.
Now the guys concentrate,
oh, we've got an idea.
A focal point is when something
starts to say, yeah, that's it!
>>LISA: You get
out of confusion.
You get into a status.
>>WOLF: Get out of confusion.
Get out of, let's say, multi
fusion into single fusion,
and it's rather not a
confusion of different fusions,
it's really a diffuseness
into an actual fusion event.
And then we have afterwards
a subsequent blur,
because you can't
hang on to anything.
Ideas fly, they flow.
So this represents
what I would call
a way of looking at
how the mind works.
What happens is that,
in the universe,
we have these bubbles
of possibilities
all over the place and
focal points appearing
all over the place.
It's like a light show.
We don't see this
because we're in,
we're made of that
kind of stuff.
But these are the points, these
are the things that occur,
and every time they
occur with a focal point,
something else starts to emerge.
We might call it an order, a
sequencing, a reason, a cause
and effect.
In fact, cause and
effect are what
we call in physics causality.
It's a very important
part of learning
to gain control of
what's going on.
We have to learn how to
control what's going-- ever
since the caves when the Ooga
Boogas were outside and were
getting clobbered
by those guys, we
had to learn what are the
tricks to getting control
over the masses of stuff
that are around us.
>>LISA: So this is what
happens as you grow up,
you're gaining control
through school of life.
This is what happens if
you form an organization.
This is what happens as you get
on with your life, or married,
or whatnot.
It's just all our attempt
for our mind and the mind--
universal mind to gain--
>>WOLF: --to gain control.
And control means to observe
or to get hold of something
we call a temporal order.
An order of the chaotic
bubbles of possibilities.
And that starts to emerge
because of the fact
that there are focal points that
come in every once in awhile.
And so if we look at
how that all works,
we have a precedent blur,
a focal point, and then
we have something
called a posterior blur,
which isn't as big as
the precedent blur.
And what that does is it gives
us a temporary or a time order,
an order of time.
So we have what I call
a triplet, big blur,
focal point, small blur.
>>LISA: OK.
Let me ask you, can this
help us form new ideas?
Could help us go-- let's talk
about going into the past
and reforming--
>>WOLF: That's coming.
That's coming up, actually.
>>LISA: OK
>>WOLF: What this is doing
is not forming a new idea,
it's forming an idea based
upon your experience.
It's like when you first
get on to ride a bicycle.
Your precedent blur is, I'm all
over the place with my bike,
but then you focal point.
Hey, that worked.
And then you have the
precedent blur where you're not
making as many errors
as you wiggle on--
>>LISA: So you're
recalling the past memory
of what it means to ride
the bike, how not to fall.
>>WOLF: That's coming later.
This is the first time
you got on the bike.
You have no memory of
riding the bike yet.
You just go, oh my god.
And then suddenly, you
peddle, focal point.
Oh, I got the bike and then,
oh, now I can relax a little bit
and ride the bike.
And you can see that, oh,
it's OK to fall a little bit
to the right or a
little bit the left.
Oh, in fact, I do fall to the
right or left when I stir.
So now you begin learning bike.
And learning bike
is just a question
of playing with these triplets.
This is all the
learning experience.
ordering experience.
This is all going
forward in time.
>>LISA: So we go from
children to adolescents
to adults who constantly is
going from the precedent blur,
to the focal point,
to the posterior blur.
That's the quantum physics
explanation of life.
>>WOLF: That basically is
what we do when we learn,
but it's not all of it
because if-- you see,
after a certain point,
you don't want-- I mean,
you start to forget stuff,
or at a certain point,
you want to learn new stuff.
And the old stuff
might get in the way.
For example, if you're
taught that the only way
to handle your spouse is to
yell to get what you want,
then you find that when
you're in the office,
you yell to get what you want.
When you go home, you
yell what you could-- You
yell at your children,
and finally, you
have this thing that you learned
because your parents maybe
yelled at you when
you were growing up
because that way you
behaved and so forth.
So you become a yeller.
But that's not the best way
to handle people, is it?
So you have to learn
how to forget that.
So there is another
possible-- there's
another way in which order
can-- I call it de-merge
rather than emerge,
it de-merges.
You start to lose
touch with that order.
So a study of a precedent
blur, which is maybe small,
then a focal point, and
then a posterior blue,
which is larger, which
means at this point,
you have fewer
possibilities merging
into more possibilities.
>>LISA: OK.
So that's how we start to fine
tune what it is that we want.
>>WOLF: No.
I would not say fine
tune, it's de-tune.
>>LISA: De-tune.
>>WOLF: De-tune.
Let go of everything
you thought you knew.
>>LISA: I love it.
>>WOLF: --in order to
do something different.
If you're an actor,
for example, and you're
asked to play a female
when you're a male,
you've got to let go of
whatever you thought a male is.
>>LISA: Right.
But that happens
everywhere in life
where you have to let
go of old patterns.
>>WOLF: You've got to learn
to let go of the old patterns
in order to learn the new ones.
It's the old proverb of the
glass half full and half empty.
People that don't let
go always have a glass
which is one way or the other.
I forgot which way is
considered one way or the other.
>>LISA: We're all half empty.
Yes.
>>WOLF: Let's say the
half-filled people are
the ones that hold on
because they can only
take so much more water in.
But the half empty people
realize, oh, there's
a lot more water I can add.
>>LISA: It might be the reverse.
>>WOLF: Who knows?
I get those two
confused all the time.
>>LISA: Because your
glass is always full.
That's right.
>>WOLF: The whole point is
empty the glass completely
in order to let in new stuff.
>>LISA: I love how you
fine tune what I'm saying.
I love it because you really
do think about these things.
How did you even get
into quantum physics?
What sparked your
curiosity around it?
>>WOLF: Magic.
>>LISA: Really?
You see, as a child,
I matured very early.
At nine years old, I
realized there was sex.
>>LISA: Wow.
That is early.
>>WOLF: That's pretty
early, but I also
developed a very strange thing.
I began stammering so badly
that my mother thought
something had gone
wrong with my brain
as a result of early
sexual maturation.
>>LISA: Did you have
older brothers or sisters?
>>WOLF: No.
I was the oldest.
So my mom took me
first-- I grew up
in Chicago-- she took me
to Northwestern University
to see if they want to
drill in my head to let out
brain pressure or
something like that.
And my mom said no to that.
I finally learned--
I finally got
ahold of a speech
teacher-- or my mother
took me to one who taught
me meditation, breathing
and watching your
breath, in and out.
>>LISA: At what age?
>>WOLF: 10.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLF: 11.
12.
So I began to learn
this sort of stuff,
and then what I would do to
improve my speaking skill
is I would practice doing
magic in front of a mirror.
I would stand in
front of the mirror--
>>LISA: How would that
help your speaking?
>>WOLF: Because when you do a
magic trick, you gotta talk.
In magic, they call it patter.
And often magicians think
of patter as being useless,
unh-uh.
Being a magician is like
being a one-act play.
You are the whole thing.
You're not only the
presenter of the data
or the thing which is the
story which is being told,
you're acting it out.
You're the stage.
You're the props
because your props are
the cards or the things or
whatever you're manipulating,
but if you ain't talking,
I mean, some magicians do that.
They just do all visual,
and they're fine.
But that's like
watching a mime perform.
That's fine.
>>LISA: You have to be really
good in order to do that.
>>WOLF: Well you
just got to remember
that you've got everybody's
focus on just what you're
doing visually, but if
you're a performer who
does what I call magic,
you've got to use your voice.
The voice is everything.
In fact, if you have a good
way of presenting your trick,
people remember different
things about the trick
that have nothing to do with the
way you really did the trick.
>>LISA: So you obviously
got over your stammering.
>>WOLF: Took me a while,
and I still am a stammerer,
but I-- in fact, you
can find me stammering
under certain
occasions that arise,
but I found out ways to do it.
So actually, in a
way, I definitely
have improved my
speaking ability
because now I'm
a public speaker.
>>LISA: You're a presenter,
and you're a phenomenal one.
And you have-- look what you do.
You take the complex
and you make it simple,
and that's basically what
you did in your life.
I never knew that.
That's beautiful.
But the beautiful
thing about it is
that you healed something and
then became a teacher of it.
>>WOLF: Yes.
And it's very important
to realize that,
that I did a little
kind of history
of all of the
so-called greats that
have ever appeared in life.
By greats, I mean great actors--
>>LISA: Leaders.
>>WOLF: --presidents,
leaders, basketball players.
I just recently found
out that Shaq O'Neal
was a stutterer and stammerer.
>>LISA: So all of
these people had
to come over massive adversity.
>>WOLF: They all had
to overcome hurdles.
So if you out there
in the audience
are feeling that you can never
be a success because you have
this particular
impediment, consider
yourself blessed far more
than the guy next door who's
got no impediments at all.
>>LISA: He should go find one.
>>WOLF: Yes.
If you want to
succeed at doing even
what you think is
something you can't
do because of the impediment,
I want to tell you you can.
I don't care what
your impediment is,
you're going to be
able to overcome it.
I'm speaking from experience.
I'm a speaker.
I overcome stammering,
psychological problems.
You can overcome it.
>>LISA: How did you tie in
quantum physics to that?
>>WOLF: Well, that's where
the story gets started.
It gets started with
magic because magic
is in front of a mirror.
And so I began to wonder about--
I mean, I began to wonder,
and that's the next thing.
I began to wonder about.
And once I started to
wonder about how things are,
I began to wonder, what is
this thing called light?
And just thinking about
light got me into physics.
So I looked at all
the college curricula
I could take when I
went to university,
and nothing interested
me as much as physics,
because in physics
I was learning
the magic of how
the universe works.
In other words, I was learning
how the tricks are performed.
I kind of think of God as a
great performing magician.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>WOLF: And so-- and then
all of us are the audience,
but we're also the
performer-- we're also
the magicians,
performers themselves.
>>LISA: We're the observer and
the performer at the same time.
>>WOLF: And the observed.
The same time.
>>LISA: The observer
and observed.
So light gets us into
the concept of-- now
this is where we get
into the physics of it.
>>WOLF: Yes, and we're
going to come up on that.
So let-- just let
me briefly-- should
I go briefly through
the rest of this?
>>LISA: Oh,no, take your time.
We love the details.
I do.
Yes.
>>WOLF: So we're back to
looking at this whole thing
about letting go, and what that
means is your precedent blur is
smaller than your
posterior blur,
in other words, what came
before is pretty well defined,
but what came after
is less well defined.
You're letting go.
And letting go is
a remarkable thing
that everybody should learn
because you can't focus
unless you let go to begin with.
So this is a very
important part.
Letting go and focusing,
there is a dance
that you have to go through,
and you have the intent and will
to make it happen.
So here's a kind of a picture
of what this might look like,
a sequence of events
in which somebody
is learning to do something,
and as the sequence goes
on from a beginning
blur of possibilities
and to focal points and then
less and less possibilities,
we're really learning
and we're striving
to become an expert
at something.
This is called mastery.
This is what mastery looks
like as far as your-- learning
your mind, how your mind works.
Right.
Quantum physics.
>>LISA: This is mind
mastery, so it's basically
how we understand our
developmental stages.
You can take this
from a macro view,
and you can look at the
evolutionary biology,
or you can take it
from a micro view
and look at your own personality
and your own evolution.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
>>LISA: This is how it goes
from a blur, to the focus,
to something that's less
controlled but solid.
>>WOLF: Actually,
just the opposite.
We're going into more
and more control.
This is what I would say
is the story of evolution.
This is the actual- we're
going to get to the other way.
That's going the other way.
Getting from more possibility
to less possibility
is becoming an expert.
So we're going that way in time.
That's what you do when you
learn to do something well.
So that's what this
picture is showing us.
>>LISA: Now, how does this
relate to time travel?
>>WOLF: Well, that's
coming up too.
So it's just a matter of how
fast you want to go here.
These are-- I'm just
showing triplets
that recognize the different
aspects of-- but we
don't need to go through that.
ok, now, here's something else.
Here we're doing what you
just were talking about,
it's the letting go process.
We're starting out from
something we know is true.
By golly, this is the absolute
truth, to I don't know.
I'm not so sure it's true.
>>LISA: So when we say, oh, I
used to believe such and such,
and I used to think this way.
So that's what that is.
>>WOLF: That's
just the letting go
of what you know is the
truth to, hey, wait a minute.
Maybe it isn't true.
Maybe what I've been
thinking all along is wrong.
This is a letting
go process, which
is vital to life as much as
the learning to do something
and mastering something.
This is the de-mastering
process, the letting go,
because without this process,
you cannot possibly learn
the other which is to master.
And in this way,
the way I've got,
it since we're
going backwards, I
look at it as a
backward flow in time.
So this is almost
a time reversal.
We're going from
very well defined
into not so well defined.
One might argue about whether
this is really time reversal
or not, and it's
really not important
as long as one realizes
that it's the reversal
process of the
expertise or learning
to become an expert
at something.
And finally here we're
looking at a sequence
of events in which
we're pretty well
convinced we know what
we're talking about.
We're getting what
was not so well known
is getting more and more
well known as time goes on,
and that's what we
would say is becoming
an expert at something.
>>LISA: Gaining
control of your life.
>>WOLF: Gaining
>>LISA: Let's just
pause for a second
here and let me ask you a
couple of questions about this.
>>WOLF: Sure.
>>LISA: So how does this relate
to re-forming past experiences
that happened to our life, say,
for example, childhood trauma,
death of a loved
one, things that we
want to be able to move
on from that cause pain.
How do you take this theory
of subspace time realms
and heal past wounds?
>>WOLF: Well, healing is
he letting go process.
When you cut yourself,
in order to heal,
the skin has to look
at possibilities
to form what's healing.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLF: It can't just--
It's not an automatic thing.
It's not like fixing your car.
>>LISA: No, it's not.
>>WOLF: It's not.
If you make a dent in a
car, it just stays dented.
>>LISA: Until you fix it.
>>WOLF: Until you fix it.
But when you heal
your body, it's
looking for the
various possibilities
and moving towards an order, so
it has to, in a certain sense,
let go of the old pattern.
The old pattern was
there was cut there.
Ah, but now there's a cut there.
I got to do something different.
>>LISA: To regain.
>>WOLF: The pattern which
holds the skin together is not
the pattern which brings
a cut into healing.
>>LISA: It's the new
pattern that does.
>>WOLF: A new
pattern has to form.
A scar tissue has
to form, something
that wasn't there
before has to form.
So the same thing happens--
we'll get more into-- it's
more-- we'll get
more into it later,
but it has to do with
what we call memory
and what memories are and
how we bring memories out.
There was a remarkable
film that Woody Allen made.
I think it's the best
work of his genius
that I've seen,
"Midnight in Paris."
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>WOLF: I love this movie.
I just love it.
>>LISA: He's a quantum
physicist, Woody Allen.
>>WOLF: Well, Woody is
a remarkable talent.
He's a very-- He's always
been a talented guy.
He's always been
funny, but he's always
made us think about stuff,
and he's been timely,
and "Midnight in Paris"
is extremely timely.
The idea that he's
recalling for us
is that whenever we think
of the good old days,
they always seem better
than what we got now.
>>LISA: Yeah.
The best is yet to come.
>>WOLF: God.
The best is yet.
Well, the best is back there.
I mean, back there is
when they had a good time.
I mean, the Roaring '20s.
My god, look at those
guys; they're just
drinking and dancing and messing
around, having good times
>>LISA: Not a care in the world.
>>WOLF: Yeah.
Or you know, what it would
be like to be in World War
II in Paris when Humphrey Bogart
is talking to Ingrid Bergman,
and you know, we try to remember
these things as romantic times.
In fact, always the past periods
or when the great art was
being created, and so forth.
In the movie, Woody takes
us to those time periods
and shows us that it ain't so
great when you're living it.
>>LISA: Right.
Just like as our
current reality is.
>>WOLF: You've got problems.
You've got pimples back there.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Yeah.
And exactly.
>>WOLF: So whatever
area you're in,
there's going to be
problems coming up,
and when you think back to
what it was in the past,
you kind of remember
it in a nicer way.
Same thing goes with
your relationships.
>>LISA: If enough time passes.
>>WOLF: When you think back to
the way it was then, including
loved ones that may
have passed, the mind
can go into two different
ways of dealing with it.
It could go as that was a
horrible thing that happened
or it begin to look at the
blessing and the wonder
and the magic of what that
relationship brought to you.
Rather than trying
to get it back,
just remember it in
the way that, say,
Woody Allen remembers
Paris in the '20s.
>>LISA: So it's quantum
physics-- a quantum physics
overview of remembering
past loved ones
or reforming traumatic memories.
>>WOLF: That's right.
It's letting go of
a fixated pattern
and remembering the
different possibilities.
And as you do that, you're
recreating your past.
In fact, in a sense,
you're creating the past.
We can always look
at old war movies
and think, oh, well that's
how the Japanese were
during World War II.
But I don't think anybody that
lived through World War II
knows that the feelings
you had towards, say,
the Japanese were very
different than the feelings
you had towards the Germans.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: I mean, no
Germans were put
in concentration camps in
America, but Japanese were.
So Japanese were
considered almost subhuman.
And so you've got to
remember that we've changed,
we've recreated that
past where we remember
those unpleasant
thoughts, and we should,
but at the same time, we
don't look at Japanese people
as being subhuman.
In fact, in many
ways, we look at them
as being superior to our
own ways of doing things.
>>LISA: Right.
Revered.
It's interesting
because what you just
mentioned has such a practical
application to how we really
reform our thoughts.
When I mentioned earlier
about the ancient art
of cheating time--
>>WOLF: Yes.
>>LISA: So you really can.
It's a perfect example,
World War II or Pearl Harbor.
We look back on these
events, and we can literally
reform the particles of
matter around those events,
correct me if I'm
wrong here, to reform
our opinions and our
feelings and our emotions
around those events so that
then we can forward-- go forward
and create new particles
of matter and feelings
and emotions, through
light and time,
to create new feelings
about the events.
>>WOLF: In a way you're right.
The question would
be where is that past
that you're recreating.
And so the question is, is
it back there somewhere,
or is it south of Chicago
and north of Dallas?
>>LISA: Right.
Where exactly is it?
>>WOLF: Well, where
exactly is it located?
And if you get into that kind
of thinking, you get nowhere.
But if you look at
the mind as being
the field in which all
things are possible,
then you can think
of it that way.
Because you see,
matter-- there is
no-- we're going to be
getting into this a little bit
in this thing, I think.
Matter just isn't stuck there.
Matter is constantly appearing
and disappearing constantly
all the time, and
the patterns tend
to come in and go
out similarly but not
always exactly the same way.
So we will be talking
about that, too.
>>LISA: So now we're into
the role of the mind,
and it basically ties into
what we're talking about now.
>>WOLF: Yes.
And what I'm doing here is
showing in these pictures
just that taking--
we're taking-- we're
zooming out of all these
different possibilities.
And it begins almost to
even look like a DNA code.
In a certain sense, we're
looking at the structures
which arise even in DNA
from all these poppings
and whatever going on.
This is more or less a
quantum mechanical picture,
but nevertheless, if
we keep zooming back,
zooming back, zooming
back, eventually
we realize that what
we're looking at
is the whole human race.
The whole human race
is being looked at.
We're seeing everything as
it is-- and even ourselves.
We are the forms which allow
this kind of picture to arise.
>>LISA: So we're really looking
at the more global phenomenon
of quantum physics in
this particular case.
>>WOLF: I think we
always have been,
and what quantum
physics is helping us--
and the reason I got so excited
about teaching quantum physics
to people who are not scientists
at all is that it provides
a much stronger
metaphorical base,
a language structure in
which we can renegotiate
our relationships with others,
that we can learn that it's OK
to give up the old thinking
and look at some new ways
of thinking to help us deal with
the problems that we're going
to be facing as
we face 7 billion,
maybe more people on the planet
learning how to re-resource,
learning how to--
>>LISA: Energy.
>>WOLF: --re-change
our concept of what
is-- why we have to kill each
other rather than maybe there's
another way.
>>LISA: It's interesting,
because if we could just
get our global leaders to think
more like this, because they're
so ingrained in either
the monetary structures
around energy and oil and gas.
Greed gets involved.
>>WOLF: It's the old way
based upon survival, based
upon that we have to have these
things in order to survive,
and if we cut those
things off, we
won't be able to survive
like we're used to surviving.
>>LISA: Do you think that
will happen in our lifetime?
>>WOLF: I think
it's happening now.
>>LISA: In certain pockets.
>>WOLF: And it's going
to continue to happen.
Enlightenment is a process
which will continue,
and I'm part of that process,
and the other teachers
that you've had on this program
are part of that process,
and we're continuing to keep
getting the message out.
And I think it's important
that Gaiam TV helps
producing such
information for people
other than the usual thing.
The GATE 2 was bringing together
movie makers and script writers
and the whole Hollywood
scene in order
to let them know that there
are other ways to do it,
and as the bottom line
suitors would say,
there's money to
made here, guys.
>>LISA: It's always
the bottom line.
But that was the Global
Alliance of Transformational
Entertainment,
and that is what--
there's a lot of different
sectors like that where there
are transformational
movements, but this
has existed since
the '60s, the '70s.
I mean, people have
constantly been
trying to achieve this
level of enlightenment.
It's in different genres
in different ways.
Are we getting more evolved?
Are we getting any
closer, or are we
just recreating the same
story over and over?
>>WOLF: Well,
there's always going
to be re-creation
over and over again.
There are always going
to be pockets of that.
>>LISA: As we've just
learned through that concept.
>>WOLF: It's the way it works.
I mean, once we've learned
something that we've-- once
you've learned that
if I'm an Israeli,
I may not like the people
that live in that country,
or if I live in that country,
I may not like the Israelis.
If I'm an Iranian, I'm
worried about-- if we
have certain ways of
thinking going on our head,
we may tend to see the
world as the enemy.
But there are also
transformations going on.
The web has made that possible.
No longer is war hidden
from us, and once people
see the horror of war--
>>LISA: This is true.
>>WOLF: --like what's going
on in Syria right now,
transformation
starts to take place.
It's going on a lot faster.
People don't think it's
fast because they seldom
see the horrors of Syria,
but it's much faster now
that people are taking
pictures on cell phones.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Time does appear to be speeding
up because of the internet,
and there are less things
that are covered up
now because of the
exposure on the internet.
>>WOLF: Can't cover
it up anymore.
>>LISA: Sometimes there's
too much information,
so you don't know what
to believe any longer,
but it is up to-- that's why
I'm all about empowering people
to find their own truth
in it because you know it
when you hit it.
All right.
So we're going to continue our
conversation on how this all
relates to us on a global scale.
And I want people to
understand this is, again,
the macro and micro.
We're looking at our individual
stages of development as people
and where we go through
our adolescence, adulthood,
and where we go into our life.
We're looking at the
global perspective
on how we are as an evolution
and our society evolves
and so forth.
And we're looking at this
in terms of the future
as well because this
absolutely impacts our future.
I want to always make sure what
you're talking about applies
to reality because we
could get way out there
in our conversations
in a very esoteric way.
But I absolutely love it.
>>WOLF: Who me?
Get way out there?
Never.
>>LISA: Dr. Quantum.
>>WOLF: Dr. Quantum
is always here.
>>LISA: Well, it's great though
because you think like this,
and you also bring
it back into reality.
>>WOLF: I hope so.
>>LISA: I absolutely
appreciate it.
>>WOLF: It's my job.
It's my job.
>>LISA: Well, we're going
to get back with that.
We're going to continue
to bring these quantum
concepts into reality when we
come back with Fred Alan Wolf.
Welcome back.
My guest is quantum physicist
Fred Alan Wolf, otherwise known
as Dr. Quantum.
We're talking about the field--
the idea of time speeding up,
the quantum field theory,
time moving faster than light.
So we're going to get on to
the meaty stuff right now.
So let's talk about that.
What is matter, really?
>>WOLF: Well, in the beginning--
>>LISA: You were there?
>>WOLF: Yes.
We were all there.
In the beginning, there wasn't
matter, there wasn't space,
there wasn't time.
What was there?
Well, that's kind of a mystery.
But suddenly there was something
called the big-- the Big Bang.
And then matter, space, and
time all came into existence
supposedly at once.
And so what we've
learned from physics
is that you can't have any
of those without the other.
Can't have time without
space and matter.
Can't have matter
without time and space.
Can't have space
without time and matter.
They are a twining,
triplicate twining, a braid.
>>LISA: You, though, then bring
God into this whole thing,
which is--
>>WOLF: Well, that
was before this
all kind of big
banged into existence.
>>LISA: But you do yourself.
You're a quantum physicist
that brings together
spirituality and
science and physics.
>>WOLF: Well, in a way this
is kind of like a story
because, you see,
in the ancient days,
there used to be a guy
called Arjuna who was a king.
And he wanted to know about
these kinds of questions.
Why am I here?
Why is life-- he had to go into
a battle, and in that battle
there were people on the other
side, the so-called enemy,
which included relatives
of his and so forth.
And he didn't want to
kill all those guys.
And so he had a driver
who drove him around
in his cart, his chariot.
And one day he walked out
into the-- those of you
that know the Hindu scriptures
and know the Bhagavad Gita
are going to probably
really hate my story.
>>LISA: You're
butchering it right now.
>>WOLF: I'm telling it my
way, but nevertheless, I
think my way is
kind of fun anyway.
So anyway, Arjuna goes
walking out into the field,
and there are all the
charioteer-- drivers
are all sitting around their
fields having a marijuana
cigarette or something,
whatever they
were smoking in those days.
Who knows what they were
smoking or drinking-- something.
>>LISA: And?
And so-called here
comes Arjuna up
to his driver who happens
to have the name Krishna.
>>LISA: Yes.
We've heard of him.
>>WOLF: Now that may
strike you as being
strange because Krishna is the
god of-- you know, the big god.
But actually, I've driven around
in cabs in New York many times,
and I've been
driven by Mohammad.
I've been driven
by Jesus, Moses.
You know?
>>LISA: Krishna.
>>WOLF: Krishna.
So it's not so
surprising that he
would have a driver
named Krishna.
So he says to Krishna,
he says, OK, you know,
I'm worried about this
battle and so forth.
Krisna says don't
worry about a thing.
I've got it all covered.
He says, what do you mean?
He says because I'm not just
Krishna, your ordinary driver,
I'm the big Krishna.
And he says, what do you
mean you're the big Krishna?
He says, I'll show you.
And suddenly Krishna
reveals his true being.
And his true being is
like an infinity of suns.
And suddenly, Arjuna,
looking at all of the beings,
all of the faces, all the
physiognomies of Krishna,
suddenly sees in that list of
all those faces, his own face.
And then he realizes Arjuna is
Krishna, and Krishna is Arjuna.
But this has been all time.
Krishna is showing him all time.
In fact he's saying, I am
time itself, and you are me.
So this is the first
revelation about the nature
of time and space.
>>LISA: So I could be you.
You could be me right
now in this quantum
field of entanglement.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
And that's really what the
quantum entanglement is really
telling us is that we are
timeless in this very anciently
vivid description that was
given in the Bhagavad Gita,
for example.
But I'm sure it's in
other cultures as well.
So in order to
simplify all that--
>>LISA: Yes.
How does that have to do with
us today, right now in our life?
>>WOLF: In order to do that,
in order to understand that, we
need to think about something we
call our own personal timeline,
a line that we imagine
is our line of time.
And for example, in the-- at
one end of the line of time,
we may have us being born that
I would call the past now.
It's a now because when we were
born it was-- that was now.
>>LISA: But there's
part of that in us now.
>>WOLF: Yeah.
Well, that's in the--
we bear a past now.
And then we have our present
now which may be, OK.
This is the way it is right now.
And we can even imagine a
future now in which we're older.
So there are three possible
points along our timeline:
past, present, future, and
I've just drawn them as dots
along our time line.
And if we draw a line through
that line of the time line,
perpendicular to it, that would
represent space, all of space,
and we just imagine it to be
like a huge plane of space.
But never mind.
It's just what we call
space, and what that really
is is what we think
in mind is now.
So now is everything which is
perpendicular to our timeline.
That's all.
So that's what we mean what
time is it now, we mean,
over there, over there,
over there now.
And we can even
imagine something
called light, which is we call
photons, particles of light,
which travel from here
now to there then.
And we could draw that is a
line of 45 degrees bisecting
our space and time lines so that
this is time and that's space.
This line of 45 degrees would
be going as a perpendicular
bisector, which you
can see on the picture.
>>LISA: And so that's
time as we know it.
So basically time is
basically up to the observer.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
And that's the key insight
of Einstein in relativity,
time is according
to the observer.
And that means that
time and the observer
are intimately
connected together.
>>LISA: The same.
>>WOLF: And that is a big hint.
So now let's carry
picture a little further.
If we have something which
is moving on our picture,
here we have our timeline
and our light line,
which is light going
off at 45 degrees,
moving at the speed of
light going through,
we have another line we
can draw which is not
moving at 45 degrees, but
it's a little bit less
than 45 degrees, and that might
be an object moving past us.
We're sitting at home,
and a car goes by, whoop.
Then in a space-time
diagram, that
would look like a line going
up at less than 45 degrees.
In other words, it's almost
parallel to the timeline
but it's sloped a
little bit, and that we
would call something moving.
>>LISA: So the idea of-- I
just am bringing this back
to anyone who might be a
little bit confused right now,
but you did a great CD
series with Sounds True.
It was called "Do It
Yourself Time Travel."
And I loved that
because it really
is that we as the observer
right now can create and act
as if something is happening
that has not happened yet
because our observation
of that thing happening,
say we have a goal
in the future.
We can literally create
that as if it is happening
right now in our mind's eye,
and as us as the observer,
right now, we can create
that thing as happening.
>>WOLF: Well, we can
think of it as happening.
We can also think
of it as happened.
So both the past, the
present, and the future
are aware from us.
In fact, the whole idea that
there is such a thing as now
is really kind of
mysterious because there
is no absolute now.
All there is is just a spread of
possibilities that we call now.
>>LISA: So this idea
of a thought that
comes through our timeline,
the speed of light
that thought comes through
our timeline, right?
>>WOLF: Well, maybe even faster.
Maybe even faster.
We're going to get into
thought in a moment,
but we need to kind of
like go back to the ABCs
a little bit about
what is going on.
We have to find out about
matter and time and space
and then we can get
into these things.
You're almost going
into the advanced course
with these questions.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: It's OK.
>>LISA: Well, I
wanted to make sure
that it applies to us and
our goals, or reality,
or if we want to run
a marathon, or if we
want to achieve a certain
level of fitness or health.
>>WOLF: OK.
Well, all that's important,
but right now we're
just looking at things moving.
The simplest things
we can think about
is, how does
something go from here
to there, and from that we
can begin to figure out, well,
why is it moving, and what's
making it move and so forth.
So here we have a picture,
and what relatively tells us
about time-- and this
is what's very strange;
that's why time
is very personal--
is that time for
a moving observer
is different than time for
a person who's not moving.
It slows down, but
what do I mean by that?
It means that relative
to me, it's slowing down.
For the guy who is moving,
watching his own clock,
everything seems
perfectly normal.
However, when he looks
at me who's not moving,
he doesn't see me not moving.
Have you ever been in a car
where two cars are like this,
and one car starts
to inch forward,
and you don't know
whether it's you moving
or the other guy is backing up?
>>LISA: In the meantime,
you're going 75 miles an hour.
So you're both moving.
>>WOLF: Or whatever.
And you get relative,
so you can't
see who is actually moving.
You can't tell who's
absolutely moving,
so what you get then is
that each person sees
the other timeline
as being different.
We won't get into the
details of all that,
but this is a kind of a picture
of what that might look like.
But what's important here is
we just move through this,
is that it's possible to think
about something going faster
than light speed, and
when we do that, we
leave the realm of
ordinary matter.
In fact, one of the
big hints that we've
learned from quantum
physics and a thing
called quantum field
theory is that matter
has to play the game
of causality, which
means that cause and effect have
to be related in such a way.
And the only way they can
be related in such a way
as we call causality, that
something happens first
and then something
happens as a result
of what happened first--
beginning and end.
In order for that
to happen, you must
have a way in which
whatever happened
first can send
information to what
happens next slower than light
speed or at light speed itself.
For example, if I shine at light
at you and you see the light,
it takes time for the light to
leave wherever I am and reach
your eye, it takes a very-- for
the distance we are right now,
it's very short.
>>LISA: Fraction of time.
Yeah.
>>WOLF: Light travels
at about a foot
every billionth of a second.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>WOLF: And to give you some
idea of what a billion seconds
is like, it seems like well--
>>LISA: Billionth of a second.
>>WOLF: A billionth of a
second is a very small part.
>>LISA: Very.
>>WOLF: But to give an idea of
what a billionth is compared
to a billion, for example,
one billion seconds
is about 32 years.
>>LISA: One billion
seconds is 32 years.
So a billionth of a second--
>>WOLF: is a very small
part of the second.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: Very, very
small part of a second.
>>LISA: And so light
travels very fast.
>>WOLF: One foot in that.
So we're really talking
about this realm-- see
the whole thing is the
matrix of the mind of God
is not a realm that we can
immediately get access to.
Everything is going very
fast, really very fast,
and now we're talking about
something even going faster
than the fastest we can
imagine, which is light,
which is something we call a
tachyon or something really
speeding along, which
is faster than light.
And so we have,
then, the concept
of what we call
the wall of light.
And it's called a wall of
light because everything
that is within
this wall of light
are events that are
happening in time
but are only relatable by
one thing after another
according to something
we call causality.
So we say that's within
the wall of light.
We draw a picture of
it called a light cone,
and we have two kinds of
cones we can think of,
a past light cone and
a future light cone.
This may be a lot more detail
than you want to think about,
and I realize that,
but just bear with me
a little bit because it's going
to get interesting in a moment.
Just idea that we have
this wall of light
that everything within
the wall of light,
everything within
the light cone,
are things that you can
affect, and everything that's
in the past light
cone are things
that can have affected you,
but everything outside of it
is called the elsewhere.
And the elsewhere is the
realm of the mind of God,
so we're going to get
into that in a moment.
>>LISA: So this
light is actually
the manifestation of matter.
>>WOLF: Light is a
very important thing
because it's on the borderline.
The wall of light is
actually the appearance
of light in the universe.
It forms a wall in the sense
that everything going slower
than it is within the wall
or within the light cone,
everything faster than it is
in the elsewhere outside of it.
So there's this
kind of separation
between what's faster than light
and what's slower than light.
>>LISA: You mentioned
when you were a child
that you are very
interested in light.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
Because light is really where
this whole thing gets started
because in the beginning, God
created the heavens and Earth.
But there's a very
famous part we're
going to come to in a
short moment about what
the second paragraph of
the Hebrew Bible says,
something about and God
said, let there be light
and there was light.
When we look at that
saying in the Hebrew text,
vayomer Elohim
yehi-or vayehi-or--
And we'll find out what
that means in a moment.
It's Hebrew.
When we look at
what that's saying,
it's saying that not
only is there a light,
but there must be
two kinds of light.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLF: And we're
going to find out
what are those two
kinds of light.
Why would God mention light
twice in the Hebrew writings?
Why is there two kinds of light?
>>LISA: Let there be light.
>>WOLF: Let there be
light, and there was light.
It's not just let
there be light.
That should be enough
if it's only light,
but there was light.
The funny thing is there's
got to be two kinds of light,
the light that let there
be and the light that was.
So we want to find out what that
is, these two kinds of light,
and that's why we need to speak
about light in a little bit
more detail.
>>LISA: We need to
understand what light is
and how we relate to it.
>>WOLF: That's right.
So now, what we're
looking at now is,
first of all, how does
matter come into existence?
In this picture,
what we're looking at
is the quantum field
which is spontaneously--
this is the mind of God working,
if you will-- spontaneously
generating particles of matter.
And as it does so, they
come into existence,
and they go out of existence,
and they come into existence,
and they go out of
existence like bubbles.
And we're showing those
bubbles from before.
>>LISA: This is a
great illustration
because it really shows what
matter looks like all around us
that we can't see
with the human eye.
>>WOLF: This is on a scale
that's so refined, so
small that we'd have
to magnify this, oh, I
don't know how many
billions of times.
This is within the size
of a single nucleus,
and if we try to
imagine how small it
is, if we were to
blow up an atom
so it was as big as
the planet Earth,
my thumb would be
to the planet Earth
as an atom is to my thumb.
>>LISA: Keep going.
>>WOLF: The nucleus, if we
were to blow up the atom
so that it was as
big as say a football
stadium, my thumb
on the 50-yard line
as compared the whole
stadium, my thumb would
be as big as a nucleus
if the atom was
as big as the whole
football stadium.
So we're talking about something
that's really very tiny,
and these things that we're
seeing in this picture
are things happening on
that very tiny scale.
>>LISA: I understand.
>>WOLF: --within the nucleus.
And this is where matter
is actually forming
and we're looking what's
called the quark field dance.
>>LISA: So if you were
to have a special camera
with special technology that was
able to-- which they do exist--
able to see these--
see matter, that's
what the quantum field is.
>>WOLF: The problem
is that light
is made of photons,
particles of light,
and they have frequencies,
and these frequencies
are so high that no
light frequency would
be able to see this.
>>LISA: Be captured by this.
Is this also where the
universal consciousness is?
Is this where the collective
consciousness lies
is in this quantum
field of matter?
>>WOLF: At this scale, it exists
on broader scales as well,
but it certainly-- this is
the scale in which we're
seeing, if you want, the
hologram of the universe coming
into existence.
>>LISA: OK.
So this is the
holographic universe.
>>WOLF: Well, we're
going to get to that,
but I think that's
in another show.
>>LISA: Stay tuned for that one.
>>WOLF: Stay tuned.
So now let's get into this
God's mind, this matrix
of hidden field where God
said, let there be light,
and there was light.
As I say, in Hebrew it's vayomer
Elohim yehi-or vayehi-or.
And those funny-looking letters
that you see on the screen
right there are really
the same letters
that I just mentioned but
written out in Hebrew.
The thing is, when you get into
a study of the sacred meaning
of things, we have something
we call Kabbalah, or Kabbalah,
>>LISA: In different ways.
>>WOLF: And it means to receive.
So the Kabbalah is
something you receive.
If you go to a restaurant
in Tel Aviv, for example,
and you have a meal
and you want a receipt,
you say to the waiter
Kabala Bevakasha, which
means I want-- give me
the receipt, please.
It can be used another way.
Kabbalah can mean a receipt,
or it means to receive.
>>LISA: Or a major religion.
>>WOLF: Or a major religion.
So it's a study of the
meaning of the Hebrew letters
themselves, and each
letter has a meaning.
So when you look at this phrase,
"God said, let there be light
and there was light," it
has a very special meaning.
Vayomer
Elohim Yehi-or Vayehi-or.
And this is what it means.
Vayomer is the
saying, and God said,
is saying spirit is
coming into existence.
Spirit is entering
into existence.
That's what Vayomer means.
Then we have Elohim, and Elohim
is the Hebrew word for God.
It's actually the
plural of gods,
which is not often mentioned
in the sacred writings,
but it really means gods.
It means spirit is moving
life and moving life
at the same time it's
doing something else,
and this is very important.
Elohim means not
only moving life,
but it also means bringing in
a resistance to that movement.
>>LISA: What does that create?
A resistance.
>>WOLF: Mind.
>>LISA: Mind.
>>WOLF: A mind which
resists the movement.
>>LISA: I see.
So that's where the observer is.
>>WOLF: That's where the
observer is coming into.
Then we have Yehi, which
means let there be.
Yehi means that life
comes into existence,
and that gives more existence.
>>LISA: So we have this spirit,
the existence of spirit,
and then it gets into light, and
then it needs mind, which is--
>>WOLF: Elohim is the resistance
of the spirit giving rise
to the movement of
existence, and then we
have Yehi, which is existence
giving rise to something which
is a life, giving rise
to existence again.
It's kind of an
intertwining chain.
And then we have the next word,
and this is the magical word,
Or.
Aleph-Vav-Reish-- Or is
the Hebrew word for light.
And Aleph means the spirit.
Vav means the fertilizing agent,
or that which distributes,
and Reish, the third letter
is the whole universe.
So Aleph-Vav-Reish means spirit
fertilizing the whole universe.
So light means spirit
>>LISA: Interesting.
And light is at the
center of everything.
>>WOLF: Everything.
>>LISA: Everything, yes.
In fact, in many
sacred writings you
find that God is light, that
it's often said that way.
>>LISA: Yes.
I am the light.
Yes.
>>WOLF: So now we
have Yehi-or, then
we have another
Vayehi, and again.
Yayehi-or.
Two word-- the word Or
is pronounced twice,
let there be light,
and let there be light.
>>LISA: There is light.
Yes.
>>WOLF: Let there be light
and let there be light,
two Ors, Aleph-Vav-Reish twice.
Why twice?
>>LISA: Why twice?
Why two different
references to light?
>>WOLF: And it turns out this is
very necessary for the universe
to begin.
There are two kinds of light.
We have light that
zigzags in space,
which produces what we
call the particles, matter,
that we existence in.
And this zigzagging
light that appears,
when it appears as
matter, turns out
to make up all of the material
particles of the universe,
which is basically what we call
the electrons and positrons.
>>LISA: So light slowed
down is this table.
>>WOLF: That's right.
>>LISA: OK.
So matter is light slowed down.
>>WOLF: It slows down
by doing a zigzag dance.
If I-- Let's say I'm
trying to go that way.
If I just go that
way, no problem.
But suppose I want to go
that way by zigzagging?
>>LISA: It's going to
take you a lot longer.
>>WOLF: It's going to
take me a lot longer.
>>LISA: So that's more dense.
>>WOLF: So in a sense,
it's going slower.
So if I zigzag
like this, it takes
me longer than just
going straight.
So light just goes straight,
but when light does this dance,
it's slowing down, and
that's what matter is.
>>LISA: So this table
is a combination
of light zigzagging
back and forth,
slowing down enough
to form solid matter.
>>WOLF: And it's also
doing something else.
It's spinning.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>WOLF: Now we're getting--
that's a very important part
of it.
>>LISA: It's kind of
like I'm doing right now.
>>WOLF: It spins in
a very special way,
and it's this two kinds of
light that we're talking about.
We're only speaking about
one kind of light right
now, the kind that
spins in a special way.
We call it spin-1/2, and we even
have a language that physicists
call them.
They call them spinners.
>>LISA: I thought it was
going to be a fancy word.
Spinners.
>>WOLF: No, spinners.
It's a spinner-- it's a
spin-1/2 kind of light.
And spin-1/2 kind of light
is the only light that turns
into matter.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: And it's a
funny kind of light.
Because it's spin-1/2, it has to
kind of dance in a kind of way
that's very familiar to the
Sufi-ists who do this kind
of dance, which I'm going
to show you in a moment.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So this is basically
light slowed down.
I mean, this is brainastics
that we're doing here.
This is the art of
what matter really is.
>>WOLF: That's right.
>>LISA: And I definitely
want to bring this
back to how this applies
to us in the universe.
>>WOLF: So if we look
at this, for example,
in the wall light picture,
this, for example,
shows an observer
observing something
moving slower than
light, very normal thing.
But there's also-- then
we look at how information
is being told to the observer.
Sequentially, from the
beginning to the end,
he's saying oh, it's
there, now it's here.
Now it's there.
He's building up a causal
picture of the universe.
I saw it there, now it's here,
now it's there, now it's there,
and that's all causal
because everything's
contained within
the light cones.
That's what that picture means.
But now we have something else.
Here we have something
moving faster than light,
and it sends information to
the observer by ordinary light,
but we see the messages
coming in in a scrambled way.
We're not just getting
the past coming before
and the future
events coming after.
They're coming in in this
rather scrambled way.
What is the meaning of all that?
Well, what we're seeing
is a thought arising
in the mind of the
observer, and what
he's doing is he's
creating events which
are the sentence-- the parts of
the sentence he wants to make,
but in order to
make sense of it,
he's got to go back into the
past to bring in past events
to bring it into logical order.
>>LISA: So what
does all this mean?
How does this relate to us?
>>WOLF: This is how we think.
>>LISA: This is how we think.
This is how thoughts arise.
Did you ever think
about, how is it
that I know what I'm
going to say next,
when right now I have no idea
what I'm going to say next?
>>LISA: So you just explained
in a quantum physics what's
happening when words come out
of our mouth and thoughts form.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
Between the words.
>>LISA: This shows me
the power of thought.
This shows me how we can
manifest thought into reality.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
>>LISA: This shows me
the importance of where
our thoughts can either
intoxicate our bodies
and our lives or our
thoughts can move us forward
into a space of
love or creation.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
Exactly.
So now, we've got
some idea about how
the mind is working at it.
Let's look a little bit more
into the dance of matter,
because it is a
remarkable dance.
And as I said, it's
all done with mirrors.
Remember I told you, as a child,
I stood in front of a mirror
in order to learn.
So in a way I kind of feel
close to this process.
>>LISA: You're the performer
and the observer, yes.
>>WOLF: Yeah.
The performer and the observer.
We think of the Sufi dances,
the whirling dervishes,
and this is a picture
showing that kind of idea
in very abstract form,
and there are really
four different ways in which we
can think of these dervishes.
Let's look at these.
Here we have on
the bottom-- we see
a dervish which is
spinning to the right.
We'll call that a
right-handed spinner.
And now, over to
the left over there,
we have another kind
of-- but wait a minute,
that dervish is
standing on his head.
That's right.
Turn it on its head,
and we have a dervish
which is spinning in
the opposite direction.
Because if this is
spinning to the right,
this would be
spinning to the left.
Looking downward, this
would be going clockwise.
Looking downward, this is
going counterclockwise.
>>LISA: Why did we
turn it upside down?
>>WOLF: Just to give you
the two possibilities.
So this would be a spinner
with one direction of spin,
a spinner with another
direction of spin
all with the right hand.
But we also have something we
can call a left-handed spinner.
So here is a
left-handed spinner.
Notice it's a mirror image.
The top picture is
kind of like a mirror
image of the bottom picture
because it's spinning this way.
Looking down, it would
be spinning clockwise.
And we also have
its mirror image.
I mean it's turned around, and
it will be looking like this.
So there are four possibilities
that these spinners can appear
to us: this way, this way,
this way, and that way--
four different arrangements
in which matter
can come into existence.
So this is what we're
looking at, how this happens.
>>LISA: So this is all
about how we create thoughts
into reality.
>>WOLF: This is basically how
matter from the mind of God
is coming into reality.
>>LISA: So this
could be your mind.
You're using the mind of God
and your mind is the same thing.
>>WOLF: Well, yes.
So we need to understand that
it's all done through mirrors,
and this is one of the
mirrors that we use.
In physics we deal with
what are called symmetries,
and one of the most famous ones
is called the PCT symmetry,
which means basically
parity, which
means space reversal,
charge, which means actually
charge reversal, which is matter
and anti-matter-- same thing--
and time or time reversal.
And I've made a little picture
using barber poles, which
is the same thing
as your hands, which
shows you what that looks like.
Here we see, for
example, something
we're going to look
at something called
parity, or space reversal.
Here we see a particle
has not yet appeared yet,
but this is like in the
mind of God so to speak,
and it's going to reflect.
Here we see it's a
right-handed particle.
We see a barber pole.
And notice how the
stripes are moving.
The stripes are moving in
the direction of the thumb
that you see on the
picture right there.
>>LISA: OK.
Remind me again how this
relates to us right now.
Remind me again what
the bigger picture is.
>>WOLF: This what--
this is a picture
of a particle coming
into existence.
>>LISA: OK.
Particle coming into existence.
All right.
Great.
>>WOLF: And now we're going
to reflect it in a mirror.
I've just drawn another
arrow to show you
that it's a
right-handed particle.
>>LISA: Thought
coming into existence.
Thoughts are particles.
>>WOLF: It's a
particle, not a thought,
and this shows you the direction
of the spin and the direction
in which the stripes, the
barber pole, are moving.
And remember, the
barber pole is a picture
of what matter, the electron
for example, looks like.
Now when it gets
reflected in this mirror,
it turns upside down.
Notice how the two
stripes are moving.
The stripes are
move-- This is moving
in the opposite direction.
But also notice-- so I can
do it like this with my hand
like so-- also notice
that not only is it
spinning in the
opposite direction,
but its stripes are pointed
in the opposite direction.
This one on the
left has its stripes
going from the top right to
the bottom left going downward.
Whereas on the right, from
the top-left to the top-right
it's going in the
opposite direction.
So you can see that we have the
spins are going in the same--
we're all spinning the same way,
but the stripes are different.
The stripes are not
in the same way.
OK?
From left to right on
the left they go up,
and from left to right on
the right they go down.
So there are two different
barber poles here,
two different designs.
>>LISA: Spinning two
different directions.
>>WOLF: Spinning, actually,
in the same direction.
>>LISA: Same direction.
I see.
>>WOLF: But because they're
different orientations--
see they're both
spinning this way.
The spin is in the direction
in which your fingers curl,
but your thumb is
pointing in the direction
in which the stripes are moving.
And the stripes are going
in opposite directions.
This parity reversal
is extremely important.
This space reversal is
extremely important.
Without this, there
can be no matter.
>>LISA: Really?
Now why?
>>WOLF: We're going to see.
Here's something we
call a time symmetry.
Here we have a
left-handed particle,
which is curling like this
and the thumb going down.
If we reflect it in time, which
means we send time backwards,
it also turns into a
left-handed particle,
but things get reversed.
Notice that the stripes
are pointing the same way,
but the spins are reversed.
>>LISA: All right.
>>WOLF: But the-- it's
still left handed.
On the right side of the picture
is the left hand pointing down,
left hand pointing up,
and time reversal--
this is what happens.
>>LISA: Time reversal is what?
Explain that.
>>WOLF: That's
difficult to explain.
>>LISA: This isn't?
>>WOLF: This isn't.
Time reversal is
almost like watching
a movie going backwards in time.
It turns out that
particles do that, too,
and that's part of the
way the game is played.
We'll come to that
a little later.
>>LISA: I don't want to
get any more confused.
OK.
>>WOLF: And here's
another one which
we call-- here's time symmetry
with a right-handed particle.
I just put that in.
I'll just go through
that very fast.
It doesn't matter.
And now here's something we call
C symmetry or charge reversal.
It has the same thing to do
with matter and anti-matter
coming into existence.
Here we have a
right-handed particle,
and when we look to see
on the left-handed side,
it becomes a
left-handed particle.
And in this case, the
directions of the barber poles
are the same, but the
spins are reversed
and the hands are reversed.
So when we have
matter to antimatter,
things get twisted
around, and we'll
come to that a little
later on, but first
let me just move now into a
picture of why this parity
reversal is very important.
Here is a particle of
matter coming into existence
and moving at the speed of
light and then going out
of existence.
And then suddenly something
called the mind of God
acts and produces a
right-handed particle, which
now goes in the
opposite direction,
goes out of existence, produces
another left-handed particle,
and we have this famous zigzag.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: And now
the zigzag is what
we call an actual
particle of matter.
This is what it's made
out of, zigzagging
particles going very fast.
>>LISA: These
chairs, these tables.
>>WOLF: All the
electrons and the quarks,
they're all doing this
dance, and they're
interacting with this field
called the Higgs field or Mind
of God field, or whatever
you want to call it,
that's interacting and causing
the zigzag to take place.
Now, we're going to
look at a thought.
Here we have something going--
>>LISA: Yay.
We're looking at thoughts now.
>>WOLF: We're
looking at thought.
Here we're looking at something
going backward in time,
then turning around,
going forward in time,
then turning around and
going backward in time.
And what we have here
is when something
can go backwards and
forwards in time,
it could literally stay in
space and not go anywhere,
but time has gotten
frozen for it
because it's going
nowhere in time.
In a certain sense, it's
moving through space but not
through time.
It's moving faster than
the speed of light.
We would call that tachyonic or
the action of the mind of God.
So what we're looking at,
is it all an illusion?
How does it all work?
>>LISA: Yes.
And so that's what a
memory-- actually when you
said they get frozen
in time, that's
what a past memory frozen
in time would look like?
>>WOLF: It's frozen in
time in a certain sense,
but you see it's moving
through space but not in time,
and that's, in a way,
how memory works.
From any point of view,
something going faster
than light could be looked
at as being everywhere
at once, frozen in time.
>>LISA: And so how
that applies to us,
I mean, bring this
all together for us.
How does this apply to our--
>>WOLF: Well, what
we're saying here
is that the universe
gets created
in which light going
forward in time
through spatial reflections
produces the material
world of matter.
Through time reflections,
it produces a mental world
of mind.
>>LISA: So in the very
beginning of the show
when I talked about how we're
going to look at time, space,
and matter differently,
this is breaking it down
to the quantum physics level of
where light and time and space
and matter are all very,
very, very different.
>>WOLF: They're different
but they're essentially
we're looking at how the mind
of God is working by producing
these rather strange
spinning-1/2 particles,
which produce the matter field.
Now, there's a
second kind of light
which I haven't
talked about yet,
and that's the light that
we see with our eyes,
the ordinary kind of light.
We call that spin-1 light,
not spin-1/2 like the spinners
were.
The spin-1 light is the
thing we call ordinary light,
like the nor-- and spin-1 light
is essentially messengers.
They're like the god Mercury.
They carry stuff from
one place to another.
The spin 1/2 half
stuff is structuring,
getting things in order.
The spin-1 stuff is sending
things through space and time,
and that's what light does,
the ordinary light we see.
>>LISA: So really, basically,
what we're looking at here
is everything is an illusion.
Everything is an illusion.
You've just explain this
through quantum physics,
that light and time and space
and matter is all an illusion.
This interview is an illusion
if you think about it.
So if everything is
truly an illusion--
>>WOLF: Everything
is, in a sense,
made of light, which has really
no actual matter or substance,
and in that sense, it's a light
show that we're living through.
>>LISA: So it is up
to us as the observer
to watch that show happen
in this show of life
essentially happen.
>>WOLF: We can't help it because
we're made of the same stuff.
>>LISA: Right.
So we're the observer
and the performer
and the observer
and the performer.
>>WOLF: That's right.
>>LISA: So then how this
applies to our lives
right now is we're
thinking about our past is
that we are the observer and
the performer in our past.
We can objectively observe our
past as if, so it happened,
it's an illusion.
If we go forward into time
and we want to create a goal,
it is essentially
that same illusion.
So we can go forward
and to create
into new ways of thinking, of
new sources of free energy,
of new ways of
forming government,
forming relationships.
You could bring it down
to the mundane level
of new ways of
creating your health,
and this is how this
all comes together.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
So that was what-- I mean,
you beautifully explain this.
>>WOLF: Maybe not so
beautifully, but I tried.
It's difficult to wrap your
mind around this stuff,
but you're hitting
the essential core.
>>LISA: Yeah.
But it helps to understand
because I couldn't explain it
in the way that you did.
It took you to explain how
space, time, and matter all
have-- are interrelated and
also have changed in order
to understand how we look
at our past as the observer
and how we look at our
future as the observer.
>>WOLF: Right.
>>LISA: So we don't need
to get stuck anymore.
>>WOLF: No.
And the thing that one has
to learn is to identify,
and the identification
process is a matter of choice.
To identify with yourself,
your bodily self,
is one form of identification.
To identify with yourself,
your past self as you were,
is another kind
of identification.
To identify with your
future self as you will be
is another kind
of identification.
Certain teachers
teach you, think
about how you're going
to be in the future.
Think about already being
there and having it.
That's a fantasy.
>>LISA: Acting as if, yes.
>>WOLF: Acting as if, you
know, and that's fine.
Thinking how you were in the
past, that's also a fantasy,
but it's also fine.
Fantasy by name, another
word for illusion, but it's
just as much of an
illusion to think
about how you are right now.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So how do you apply the
field of quantum physics
to the law of attraction that
we've heard so much about?
>>WOLF: The law
of attraction is--
can be many different things
to many different people.
I couldn't go along
with everything
in the law of attraction.
I couldn't quite put my fingers
on it and say it's a law.
It's certainly not a
law of physics the way
it was being presented, no.
It's really more of
a metaphor for stuff.
To teach people that
all you gotta do
is wish for winning
the lotto and you're
going to win the lottery.
Well, what I do to
people, I say, OK.
That's going to
work, but you also
have to consider that everybody
wants the same thing you want.
So let everybody go out
and buy a separate lotto
ticket and everybody
wants to win the lotto.
And let's say that you
all buy the same lotto
ticket, the same winning
numbers, and you all win.
How much money do you get?
Actually you'll get, on a $5
ticket, you may get $0.03.
So you won the lotto, but
it wasn't worth it, was it?
>>LISA: But does the law
that like attracts like
apply to the law of
attraction at all?
>>WOLF: Not really.
It's really like attracts
unlike in the physical, material
world.
That's what we talk-- remember
we were talking about charge
and matter and anti-matter.
Positrons and electrons
are matter and anti-matter,
and they will attract each
other and annihilate each other.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLF: So like attracts unlike.
You know, the whole idea
of using the idea like
attracts like, it's a
kind of a mixed metaphor.
It really doesn't
quite work that way.
So I never used that in the
film when I was in the movie.
>>LISA: "What the Bleep?"
>>WOLF: No.
No.
In the movie "The Secret."
>>LISA: OK.
So when you have an idea
of like attract like,
like attracts unlike.
>>WOLF: Unlike.
>>LISA: How do you
apply that to like?
>>WOLF: Well, you have
to think about that.
If you-- Here you
are a superstar.
Walk down the street, superstar.
See who you attract.
Everybody who wants
to be a superstar.
>>LISA: Right.
The unlike.
>>WOLF: And they're
not like you at all.
>>LISA: Right.
That's interesting.
So if you really
do want to attract
the right type of
environment for yourself,
what would you have to say?
Be unlike that environment.
>>WOLF: Don't think of it
as attracting, as seducing.
It's not an attraction.
>>LISA: You think
of it as being.
>>WOLF: No.
Think it as a giving.
You give to get in
this kind of thing.
So it's sharing.
It's giving.
It's providing a field in
which an invitation is offered
rather than a field in
which you say I want.
I want.
You get rid of one thing,
"I," and suddenly it
becomes the wanting,
and the wanting
is the field of wanting, and
everybody shares in that field.
So now learn to
identify with that
and then you can see
what is it that I
can give to that
field of wanting.
>>LISA: That is what the
quantum field is all about.
>>WOLF: That is what the
>>LISA: So in these experiments
where enough people intention
or meditate on one specific
outcome, that field,
that quantum field of wanting
without attachment or an ego
in specific ways of
having it turn out,
but that actually can work.
>>WOLF: It will work,
but the magical thing
is to give up the ego.
I mean, the point
is you-- you can't
be wanting it for yourself.
It doesn't quite-- the richest
people in the universe,
in the world, are
not people that
have made money for themselves.
There are exceptions.
I'm not going to say that,
but usually the exceptions
are the ones that
get thrown into jail.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: Like the Ponzi schemers.
The people that are capable
of creating wealth for others
get very wealthy themselves.
>>LISA: Isn't that interesting?
>>WOLF: The people that are--
I mean, take Oprah Winfrey,
for example.
I mean, here's a
very remarkable woman
who has created an enormous
field for others to benefit
from her story, and
she's become one
of the richest
people in the world.
And not because she
wants to make money.
I never got her as
a money grabber.
That isn't her thing.
>>LISA: She's rich in
spirit and rich in kindness.
>>WOLF: Because
she's spiritually
interested in
helping other people.
In fact, all of her shows are
based upon helping others.
>>LISA: Yes.
Absolutely.
>>WOLF: --and showing
how this can be achieved.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
That's exactly what this
show is about as well.
>>WOLF: And so that's what
we all have to be doing.
We have to be remembering
that we're not--
the self is an illusion.
It's illusion.
It's based upon survival of
the material substance, which
are the body interacting
with-- the mind interacting
with the body.
And if you identify with
that, then everything you do
will be to ensure the survival
at the cost of others.
>>LISA: So if you think
that you're stressed,
then that will become a reality
and it will form in other ways
around your life.
If you think the outcome
is going to be negative,
then that will form
around the rest of it.
So if it's all
really an illusion,
and if stress is an
illusion, and if negativity
is an illusion, then we
can turn that around.
Right?
>>WOLF: Negativity, stress
arise from one single word.
>>LISA: Survival.
>>WOLF: No.
I.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLF: If you think about
every negative thought you have,
I'm willing to bet
you dollars to donuts
that there is an I
in there somewhere.
Why did this happen?
Why did this happen to me?
Why am I this way?
Why can't I be like
her or like him?
Why am I so dumb?
Why can't I be smart like he is?
>>LISA: So it's all---
>>WOLF: I. I. I. I. I. I. I.
>>LISA: So getting
off of yourself
and understanding that we're
part of this quantum field.
So what we've also
learned today,
and I thank you so much
for these perspectives
because it's-- in understanding
the quantum level of this,
it helps us understand
the macro level of it.
>>WOLF: Yes.
>>LISA: So we have
learned today a lot.
We've learned that it
is all an illusion.
We've learned that time itself
is based on the observer.
We've learned that we are the
creators of our own experiences
as long as it doesn't
involve the ego and the I.
>>WOLF: Well, it has to involve
the ego and I to some extent--
>>LISA: To some degree.
Right.
>>WOLF: --because you're
here in a bodily form.
The whole thing is don't
identify with the ego I.
Experience it, yes.
You're hungry, eat.
You're tired, sleep.
You're in need of
love, reach out.
It doesn't mean that
you give it up all.
You don't lose it all,
but give it its relevance,
but don't make it
the only thing that's
important to what
your life is about.
Because really,
your greatest joy
will come from
compassion, understanding,
giving of yourself to others.
It's just the way it works.
And you get reward from that.
>>LISA: It's just the way
the quantum world works.
That's the way the
quantum universe works.
>>WOLF: That's the way it works.
>>LISA: That's a
great way to wrap up.
Thank you so much.
>>WOLF: You're very welcome.
>>LISA: You've gone
full circle here,
and I really appreciate it.
Thank you, Fred.
So basically what
I've learned today
is that time is really
up to the observer
and that there is a
do-it-yourself approach to time
travel as Fred Alan
Wolf talked about.
But really, we are the creators
of our own experience--
our past, our present,
and our future--
and that this concept can really
apply to all areas of our life.
Thank you so much.
This is Lisa Garr, and
thanks for watching Gaiam TV.